counting calories simply does not work
at all and people will say oh but it
does it does it does well if you look at
the scientific studies it doesn't
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with
nephrologist and best-selling author dr
jason fung jason thank you so much for
joining me
oh thanks for having me great to be here
dude i am really excited to
talk to you about two things that i
think are really revolutionary
that i don't see anybody talking about
as well as you or maybe even at all and
that is you've really
pushed for a paradigm shift in the way
that we think about both insulin and its
role in longevity obesity
diabetes and on and on the list goes and
then this whole idea of cancer paradigm
3.0 which i find really really
interesting um i want to start with the
role of insulin
in weight loss in
disease mitigation
what is it that was sort of that key
insight for you that got you thinking
about this in a different way and how
exactly is it that you think about it
well it's interesting because the
question of weight loss is one that has
really become more and more important as
we've had more and more obesity so
over the years we've seen more people
with obesity which has led to more
people with type 2 diabetes which has
led them to get kidney disease which is
where i kind of come in because i'm a
kidney specialist so it's become a
bigger and bigger part of the practice
and it sort of dawned on me that
eventually got through my thick skull
that uh really weight loss is sort of
really critical to keeping people
healthy because it's
sort of obvious like it leads to type 2
diabetes which is a huge risk factor not
only for kidney disease but for heart
attacks and strokes and cancer and it's
a leading cause of blindness and
amputations and
diabetic infections and all kinds of bad
things so almost like
you know 50 of what i do is related to
type 2 diabetes and the point was that
if you can reverse your type 2 diabetes
then you're not going to get these
diabetic complications and in order to
do that you need to lose weight which is
why i became very interested about eight
years ago in the question of how to lose
weight and i didn't know much about it
at the time but people were always
you know what i had learned in medical
school was all about sort of calories
and calories out sort of uh thing
but the more i looked into it one it's a
very very um
unsuccessful way to lose weight counting
calories simply does not work at all and
people will say oh but it does it does
it does well if you look at the
scientific studies it doesn't
every single study that's looked at sort
of say you know trying to restrict
calories
leads to at best a couple of pounds of
weight loss over like eight years so
you acknowledge that if you
if you take calories out of somebody's
diet long enough they are going to get
lean regardless of anything else so
where is where does that paradigm break
down
in reality and is it just willpower that
people aren't sticking to it or is it
something else
well it's something else and the whole
point is that it's not the number of
calories it's what your body does with
those calories because if you take 100
calories if you eat a cookie for example
you take 100 calories
your body has a decision to make do i
store that as body fat
or do i burn it for energy and say
increase body heat generation for
example and that's the basal metabolic
rate that's the number of calories that
your body uses
in a day so
which your body does so for that same
100 calories you can either become
fatter or you can have a bit more energy
during the day and which one your body
does really depends on the hormones that
are associated with uh the foods that
you're eating and that's the real key
because if you simply cut calories and
this is the way that you know i was
taught and everybody was taught you
simply cut the fat eat less fat because
fat is very dense in calories you get
less calories and therefore your body is
going to lose body fat but that's not
necessarily true if you eat 500 calories
less your body could simply decide to
burn 500 calories less and you won't
lose any body fat and it's not a matter
of thermodynamics because that's that
whole idea that it's just about
thermodynamics assumes that your basal
metabolic rate remains absolutely rock
stable that is if you're using 2 000
calories a day today
you go on a diet you'll still use 2 000
calories a day but you won't we know
we've known that for at least 100 years
of basic research that your body will
actually use less fewer calories so
cutting 500 calories a day which has
been the standard device is very
unsuccessful because if you don't change
the hormonal system in your body
the the in different foods contain
different hormonal instructions
your body could simply decide to burn
500 less and you will not lose body fat
so it's simply false to say if you cut
500 calories a day
down you'll lose a pound of body fat a
week it's actually not true in any
way shape or form
just like if you say well if you make an
extra hundred dollars uh
you know this week
that you'll be a hundred dollars richer
you might or might not be if you make a
hundred dollars more and you spend a
hundred dollars by going out you're not
richer same thing with your body
you you take 500 calories or less that
day but you burn 500 less because your
metabolic rate goes down you're not
losing body fat and that's the whole
point so it's it's not the total number
of calories that's important it's what
your body does with those calories and
that depends on hormones and in fact
everything in our body runs on hormones
those are the instructions that we give
to our body as to what to do so
everything your body does or doesn't do
depends on hormones those are the sort
of mediators do you have any sense of
why different foods have different
hormonal cues like why is it that
carbohydrates
signal the body to secrete insulin
i think the most out of all the
macronutrients
given that that is the signal to the
body to store
like why doesn't protein for instance
signal the body to store why is it
specifically carbohydrates yeah actually
protein does stimulate insulin as well
and equal amounts
um some of some proteins can actually
stimulate quite a bit of insulin it
doesn't so if you eat carbohydrates your
glucose goes up and then your insulin
goes up and protein your glucose doesn't
go up or your insulin does go up
and it's really to do with the way the
body metabolizes so
insulin in a more general sense is a
nutrient sensor so that tells your body
that hey food is on the way in
therefore let's switch over to storing
calories
as opposed to burning calories
the reason dietary fat doesn't do that
is that it doesn't get metabolized
through the liver
dietary fat actually gets absorbed
through the intestines goes into the
lymphatic system and sort of goes
directly into your fat stores so because
it doesn't go through that whole
processing through the liver it actually
never metabolizes um and therefore it
doesn't really need insulin for that but
one of the things is that insulin you
know different hormones our body needs
to know what's coming in in what
proportion so insulin is a nutrient
sensor but so is something called mtor
which really is very specific for
proteins it goes up quite a lot tells
your body that there's a lot of protein
coming in and there's a lot of
associated things but one of the things
that's important is that these nutrient
sensors are also linked to growth
pathways so therefore your body really
only wants to grow when nutrients are
available and therefore when you do it
take a lot of
carbohydrates or even protein your body
senses that there is food coming in and
therefore will turn on growth pathways
to grow
muscles to grow
you know stores of body fat that kind of
thing is the key in this then because
the thing that i found most interesting
about what you talk about is a focus on
insulin at least that's been sort of my
read on
what you talk about moving away from you
know for a long time you hear people
talk about glucose blood glucose the
body tightly regulates that
but this idea the analogy that you use
of the suitcase right and sort of where
this starts to become a problem is what
we call insulin resistance is probably
not the right way to think about it
we'll get to that in a second but first
i want to talk about low carb diets
right so low carb diet was wildly
effective for me in terms of reducing
the body fat that i had
that's certainly something i've heard
you and other people say that reducing
your carbohydrate intake is you know
going to have a disproportionate
response in terms of body fat than
something like you know dietary fat or
protein
help me understand then the relationship
if protein is spiking my insulin and
insulin is the thing that's storing
things into my fat cells
why are carbohydrates more quote unquote
problematic when it comes to storing fat
i think it comes down to several things
so proteins is actually quite complex
because it's not primarily fuel so
carbohydrates and fat are primarily
fueled we burn it and we store it so our
body stores glucose or body source fat
but our body doesn't really store
protein so it's primarily a structural
thing so your body isn't
so even though
insulin is stimulated it's actually
quite complex because glucagon is
stimulated which keeps the glucose
normal
but then protein also has very
strong effects on satiety
that is there are certain other hormones
that when you eat for example protein
are going to tell you hey you're full
you need to stop eating
so
if you think about eating steak for
example
you can eat a certain amount of steak
and then at some point
you can't really just keep eating
uh you will actually just get nauseous
as we've all done at the buffet when
we've eaten too much
yeah you can't just say oh that looks
good i'm just gonna have another pork
chop it's really hard to do that because
those satiety hormones are very powerful
the reason carbohydrates are very
problematic is that they tend to be
processed so processing removes a lot of
these satiety signals so even if you've
eaten a huge buffet and somebody says
hey do you want a few sips of my soda
you'd say sure no problem because they
don't activate your satiety mechanisms
and same for like a cookie you could
easily eat a cookie after after you're
full from dinner where you would not eat
another you know pound of steak so
it's it's a bit more complex because
there's multiple interacting hormonal
systems that regulate how we respond
protein doesn't seem to be nearly as bad
even though it has a lot of insulin
effect it has probably a lot of these
other hormonal effects that are just as
important and really stop us from eating
just like if you were to eat steak and
eggs in the morning a lot of fat a lot
of protein it tends to keep you more
full than if you're to eat white bread
and jam you eat that and then at 10 30
you're looking for a low-fat muffin for
example and and this is uh one of the
things which i always say is like when
you're thinking about weight gain weight
loss you really have to think about
hormones because it's really a hormonal
imbalance not a caloric imbalance
because the calories on all these foods
can actually be exactly the same
and that's why i'm not and you know not
all carbohydrates are bad for you like
clearly there have been many many um
societies that have lived primarily on
carbohydrates
yet if you measure the insulin
response they're actually quite
good so something like that they did a
study in catawba for example which is a
south pacific island and
they measured their diet and there's
about 70 carbohydrates but natural
carbohydrates and they weren't eating
all the time then when they measured
their insulin their insulin level was
below the fifth percentile of a
reference sort of swedish population
so that means that even though they're
eating a lot of carbohydrates their
insulin levels are still very low so
there's lots of things not only the
foods that you eat but also the
frequency which with you eat them
plays a really important role and the
amount of processing that goes into it
and you can see that effect in something
like the glycemic index where when you
eat white bread things just spike way up
but if you're to eat beans which is all
carbohydrate the glycemic index is much
much much lower and most natural foods
are like that you don't see that huge
spike that you get so the processing of
the carbohydrates makes it especially
problematic because it is a fuel source
for our body that our body is able to
use very easily
and it's highly refined so that you
don't have any satiety and then you're
getting it sort of absorbed
very quickly because you removed all the
fiber you've removed all the fat and
that's you know that's that's sort of
what goes into it but focusing on the
hormones is really important because it
leads you away from focusing on
something like calories
the only implication of focusing on the
hormones as opposed to calories is that
some foods are more fattening than other
foods that's really the only implication
it's like boy if you were to ask your
grandmother or great grandmother she'd
say well duh i hope you didn't have to
go to university to learn that of course
some foods are more offending than other
foods like cookies are fattening like
anybody could have told you that anybody
with an ounce of common sense would have
told you you don't get fat eating
broccoli like these are just like
things that we take for granted that we
should know
but you get so people get so so focused
on oh it's all calories it's all
calories that they say ice cream is as
fattening as salmon it's like no
obviously not if you've ever lived
you know
in on this earth you would know that
ice cream and salmon are not equally
fattening for the same amount of
calories that's just common sense so
this distinction between chronic caloric
restriction
and fasting
that i find really interesting and let
us for the sake of this discussion
assume that we have
a person who is willing to endure an
unlimited amount of suffering
um and you even you've talked a lot
about the book unbroken that you read
about world war ii
people in japanese concentration camps
and they were literally being starved
and obviously all of them got lean
so what i want to understand is okay
fasting seems to have all these
tremendous benefits
chronic caloric restriction has some but
also has like this really damaging
psychological component if there was no
damaging psychological component
would they be equal or is there still
some difference
it all depends on how you do the caloric
restriction so because it's not just
about the calories it's about the
hormones right so you have to sort of
take it not to sort of this two
compartment problem you have to take it
to like a three compartment problem
right there's what's coming in there's
what's stored and there's what's being
used okay so most people only think of
sort of the two compartments and then
the storage is sort of left over that's
not the way the body works if insulin is
high your body is going to store
calories remember insulin is a nutrient
sensor it tells your body that hey
energy is coming in you're eating you
need to store some of this right so you
eat breakfast lunch dinner did you get
somebody on a low calorie diet like if
you were on
700 calories a day but i gave you
insulin could i make you fat yeah
absolutely whoa
because think about it this way if you
have insulin your body
and so if you think about it
physiologically
if you have insulin your body goes into
a storage mode because it's a hormone
insulin is a hormone it tells your body
food is coming in and even if you don't
give food if you just give insulin
you're going to switch your body into
this mode where it thinks that food is
coming in so it's going to store energy
so imagine that for example you are a
coal
you know a coal uh plant right the power
plant you get 2 000
tons of coal coming in and you burn 2000
tons of coal that's fine you have a
storage compartment too so if you're you
know if you do a thought experiment say
you say you have 2 000 tons of coal
coming in you divert the whole thing
over to
uh or a thousand tons of coal into
storage well you only have a thousand
left so you're gonna feel tired and cold
and hungry
and you're gonna get fat at the same
time right that's what's gonna happen
but it's because of the way that you've
diverted off the energy so think about
it from a human body standpoint
suppose you have 2 000 calories coming
in 2000 calories going out
now you artificially inject insulin
well you shuttle a thousand calories
immediately into body fat and you have a
thousand calories left
to burn well what's going to happen your
your body heat generation is going to go
down your heart rate is going to slow
you're going to feel tired you're going
to feel hungry because you want to get
more energy right that's the signal for
you to get more energy so that you can
get more you can burn more guess what
that's exactly what happens when you go
on a chronic calorie restricted diet
and the the point is that if you do it
correctly and you you correct that
insulin part of things
so that none of it's going into storage
and you can't do that with chronic
calorie restriction you certainly can
you have to know that you have to do it
properly like cutting out
processed foods cutting out refined
carbohydrates that kind of thing but it
all depends on that sort of that sort of
toggle in the middle that says how much
goes here how much grease here insulin
what it does is it tells your body to
store fat but it also turns off fat
burning remember fat is purely a store
of energy it's a store of calories so
you're immediately shuttling all your
energy into storage and you have nothing
left
so say you take 700 calories but you're
pumping people full of insulin
so
that energy is going to go into
into
storage and 700 is probably the lower
limit of what you could really do but
your body would then try to subsist on
say five six hundred calories of energy
you get really hungry because you're
you've got no energy coming in you
probably wouldn't be able to last very
long but you can still gain weight
there's a great experiment a few years
ago where they actually took the type 2
diabetics and they gave them a lot of
insulin so they went from zero
units a day to a hundred units a day
over a span of six months which is a lot
and they dropped the number of calories
that they ate by 300 okay so they're
taking insulin but they're eating less
700 300 calories a day less
so over the span of six months on
average that group gained 20 pounds
20 pounds by eating 300 calories a day
less why because so let's take an
example you're eating 2 000 calories you
go down to 1700
but the insulin is shuttling 700 of that
immediately off to storage so you're
gaining body fat
now your body can only burn 1000
calories a day so you feel like crap you
feel tired you feel hungry and you're
still gaining weight and guess what if
you do it wrong which is constantly
snacking and eating cutting out all the
dietary fat and eating all
refined carbohydrates which remember is
almost precisely what we told people to
do in the 80s and 90s oh i remember it
well yeah actually
i had a tub of licorice because it was
fat
and i would just eat it and eat it i'm
like it's fat-free
what's happening why am i getting fat
yeah that was a very confusing time
it makes perfect sense from like because
but you have to think of that additional
step that is what is the body actually
doing it's this sort of flip the switch
so when you eat you're storing body fat
when you don't eat when insulin is going
down you're going to burn body fat
you're actually going to you can't burn
body fat if insulin is high let's ask
then the reverse question so i fully
accept that all food is a signaling
molecule that's triggering a some
cascade of hormones
i know what to do if i want to store a
lot of fat i'm going to eat a lot of
processed carbohydrates that are gonna
remove all my society mechanisms and
it's gonna spike my blood glucose like
crazy my body's gonna pump a bunch of
insulin to make sure that that gets
pulled out of the bloodstream i'm gonna
get fat okay
is there a diet that's optimized on the
exact opposite side where i'm taking in
a very
satiating amount of calories but it's
dropping my insulin or failing to
trigger my insulin is maybe the right
way to think of it
and therefore i'm eating maybe more than
your average bear but i'm actually
getting leaner
yeah there's there's certainly lots of
them
there and
the principles are much the same one is
you want to avoid sugar because sugar
the way that we process fructose is sort
of particularly bad and that's why sugar
is particularly fattening really and
that's that's true if you're a bear
you're eating a lot of ripe berries and
stuff because you're trying to gain fat
and it's also true as anybody knows if
you're eating a lot of cookies and
brownies you're probably going to gain
weight
the um the other thing is you can't eat
all the time because again it's a cycle
between feeding and fasting that's what
we're supposed to do if you don't give
your body time to burn off all those
calories that it's taken in which means
the fasting period you're gonna overall
gain weight it's like a one-way valve if
you go in but don't come out eventually
everything just gets bigger
same thing
that energy cannot come out if your
insulin levels are high
that's just the way it's designed and
it's sort of like you know if you see a
tanker you know those tanker trucks on
the side of the road sometimes you think
oh they'll never run out of fuel because
they have all this fuel but they do run
out of fuel of course because you can't
access that fuel that's in that big
container same thing with your body fat
right it's locked away
if you
do not lower your insulin levels you
will never have access to those stores
of energy
once you lower it hey all that energy
just comes flowing in and and for people
who are who are on long who have done
longer fast and this is what's so
interesting about the whole process when
you actually do it is that the hunger
starts to go down
significantly the psychological hunger
goes up because people are like oh i
really want to eat that but the physical
hunger actually tends to go down meaning
measured by things like ghrelin or
whatever ellen so hunger hormones and so
on and and people you talk to people and
you know i've done it live i know lots
of people have done it and then they all
say the same thing by day three
they for the hunger's almost completely
disappeared and why is that well because
you're fueling yourself from your body
fat stores and therefore you actually
have no no need
to eat
it's it's it's it's an interesting
process which people never think about
but it's completely physiologic
yeah so i've done my longest fast was
five days
i've done many fasts that are 24 hours
to 72 hours i find 72 while not pleasant
i find it relatively easy i don't
decline in performance but day four and
five i do
and i'm super curious to know
um if i am doing something wrong like am
i supposed to be supplementing and i'm
talking a true water only fast
um
should i be eating salt should i be
taking magnesium like what what is it
yeah everybody's different certainly
some people salt is probably the main
thing people get into trouble with
because we're on a relatively high salt
diet and then to go to a
sort of zero with just water only
zero salt is a bit of a transition
sometimes so some people find that their
pressure blood pressure goes low um and
that that makes them not feel so good so
a lot of people have found better from
taking salt either salt and water or
just a salt
like under the tongue even
magnesium is another one that that
tender low and some people find it
helpful to supplement there as well
the other things
that
people find uh useful is to take some
broth for example which is going to give
you it's not a true fast none of these
i'm going to say that sounds like
cheating to me
yeah they're they're sort of like um
i call them variants because they're not
the water only fast is really a true
fast
um but
you can get a lot of the benefits by
taking some of these other things and it
makes it easier so it's a sort of a
trade-off it's sort of like bulletproof
coffee which is of course not fasting
but it's a very very pure sort of fat
and therefore it's going to provide a
lot of satiety and then let you go
through the day maybe it allows you to
go long and
overall you might wind up positive in
terms of
weight loss and so on so lots of people
certainly have found that useful not
everybody
but certainly it's it's that but water
only fast can be more difficult because
of the associated electrolyte
problems your body is supposed to handle
it
but it doesn't always sure so if we're
looking at longevity and we want to
prolong life as much as possible and
anti-cancer in fact this might be the
perfect transition into your
brilliant synthesis of what's going on
from cancer paradigm 1.0 to 2.0 to 3.0 i
found that absolutely fascinating in
your new book cancer code it was subtle
and yet changes
everything and
if you can just like give a quick sort
of thesis on that one two three thing i
think that really helped people yeah
yeah and and you know i'm not the one
who made it up i just was the one to
sort of
explain it sort of in an accessible way
and honestly it's it's the most
fascinating story in medicine today i
think is
cancer because it's undergone this
tremendous change in the last sort of 10
20 years and nobody even talks about it
and what i talk about is sort of the
these modern paradigms of cancers the
way that we look at cancer and the
reason they're important is because they
determine what sort of treatments we use
so the first sort of modern paradigm of
cancer is sort of this cancer is a cell
that grows too much so you have breast
cancer for example you have a breast
cell now something happens to that
normal breast cell okay so it starts off
as a normal cell but somehow mutates
into this breast cancer cell or this
lung cancer cell and this lung cancer
cell then grows and grows and grows and
then it moves around and spreads or this
is called metastasis then you die so the
first paradigm is hey this is a cell
that grows too much so therefore our
treatments are actually ways to kill
cells and that's the sort of core of
modern oncology is to cut it out which
is surgery you can burn it with
radiation or you can poison it with
chemotherapy chemotherapy is really
nothing more than a selective toxin it
kills some cells faster than it kills in
other cells so that's why you have these
horrific side effects their hair falls
out they nauseated all the stuff you
think about with chemotherapy
is because
the idea of chemotherapy is to kill the
cancer slightly faster than you kill the
patient that's really it it's a
selective toxin
but that's the paradigm and it makes
sense from that
you know because if it's if it's growing
too much then kill it that's basically
it
now that reached its limits probably by
the 60s and by then we were talking
about genetics so everybody started to
look at genetics and then that's the
sort of next
huge paradigm shift
is that we were trying to understand at
a deeper level
not we weren't saying that cancer cells
didn't grow the question we're trying to
ask is why are they growing and so we
said well the answer now is that they
have genetic mutations that lets them
grow too much and sure enough when we
look we found these onco genes and tumor
suppressor genes so genes that control
growth and when the cell
gets a mutation in one of these critical
genes
then it would grow too much and that
made perfect sense
so
the point of of
something like lung cancer and smoking
because we know smoking for you know
clearly causes lung cancer
smoking is not a targeted mutation
device
it's very non-specific you're just
creating damage all over the place so
what they said was that this is a random
genetic mutation so you're just creating
damage in the genome
and if you're damaging a lot you're
getting a lot of chances to hit this
critical growth gene area and it's going
to let cells grow so this was the the
genetic paradigm which really has
dominated cancer medicine for the last
50 years
and so instead of trying to kill cells
this led to new treatments and instead
of trying to kill cells we're trying to
correct the genes that controlled it and
the first few drugs of the sort of
genetic paradigm were just amazing so by
the 2000s we were like we are going to
cure cancer so we did this whole
human genome project we said all we need
to do
is map out all the genes
look at the cancers map out those genes
and see what's different we're going to
find one or two genetic mutations we're
going to find a drug to cure that one or
two genetic mutations boom we're going
to cure cancer and that was really what
we thought at the time
it was a time of incredible promise
but it didn't work
that was
like if you look at the number of
genetic treatments of cancer that really
made a difference you're talking maybe
five
right in the last 40 years five really
good drugs that's not a lot and that's a
long way from curing cancer
and the problem is when we went back so
they did the human genome project then
they did this cancer genome atlas
where they mapped out all these genes
they took 30 000 cancers mapped out the
genes and said
what are the one or two critical genetic
mutations they didn't find one or two
each cancer had like 50 or 100 genetic
mutations and it was crazy because if
you had a cancer clinic where one
patient had lung cancer so patient a had
lung cancer patient b had lung cancer
patient a's lung cancer had 50 mutations
patient b had 50 mutations completely
different mutations
so how are you going to treat this you
can't get 50 drugs for patient a and 50
completely new drugs for patient b
it's just impossible and that's why
cancer
treatment just sort of slowed to an
absolute crawl it was just
you know a huge amount of disappointment
and
that sort of spelled the end it wasn't a
random genetic mutation so it wasn't
that genes weren't mutated it was what
is driving these mutations and that sort
of spawned this whole
next paradigm shift to cancer paradigm 3
which so few people talk about and i
don't understand why because i i find it
endlessly fascinating and what we were
trying to do we weren't trying to
uh invalidate that
these genetic mutations because clearly
these genes had mutations what we're
trying to understand was once again try
and get to that one level deeper of why
why are these genes mutating and the
totally fascinating answer that they
came up with
is that it was an evolutionary process
not a forward-moving evolutionary
process it was a backwards evolutionary
process towards a more primitive form of
our cell
which was there from evolution
and what's fascinating is that if you
look at pathologists like the way that
people who look under the the microscope
at cells
that is exactly how they describe cancer
cells primitive
uh undifferentiated
you gotta use you use a an analogy or a
metaphor in the book about a bear in a
tutu that i thought oh my god like it
lets you conceptualize what this is so
perfectly will you walk people through
that
yeah and the point is that the cancer is
actually a reversion to a more primitive
form of the cell
and it's sort of like if you have a wild
bear you can raise it and teach it to
dance and wear a tutu but it's still a
wild animal
so if you provoke it it'll still kill
you like you'll still wear a tutu but
it'll still kill you so it reverts to
being that wild animal and our cells are
very much like that so we came from
unicellular organisms so all of us sort
of evolved from small bacterias and so
on fungi and so on and
under the right conditions these cells
actually undergo an evolutionary process
back towards this more survivalist sort
of primitive
cell a single-celled organism
its primary mandate is to compete with
other cells as opposed to a
multicellular organism which its mandate
is
cooperation and they are fundamentally
against each other as we move from
cellular competition to cellular
cooperation
we had to put on all these instructions
on top these genetic instructions to
suppress all these competitive urges
when you cause genetic damage and strip
away you damage all these sort of
controlling layers
what shines through is that competitive
nature and then the cells those cancer
cells actually behave exactly like
unicellular organisms and that's
fascinating again
because our own immune system has
actually identified these cells
as foreign cells
like there are
you know
immune cells in our body that identify
sort of self
our own cells versus other cells so you
avoid friendly fire and cancer cells are
actually identified intrinsically
without being having seen them ever
before your own body will identify these
as foreign cells and destroy them and
that's really the reason why we don't
have cancer sort of uh with 99 of the
population because when you suppress the
immune system of course you increase
your risk significantly of developing
these cancers because it's our immune
system which is playing that anti-cancer
role so what you're trying to do is weed
out so our body has these very efficient
anti-cancer mechanisms where we go
around and we're hunting down these sort
of you know anarchists and stuff trying
to these people who are not going to
follow the rules who are competitors not
cooperators we try and hunt those down
and we kill them so that we stay cancer
free it's only at the end of you know
only with time
uh when stuff falls through or with
chronic damage such as with lung uh lung
cancer for example with smoking that
that you're damaging the genome and
those controlling organisms and allowing
it to shine through which is called an
activism which explains a huge amount
like that this theory just explains so
much
about cancer because if you think about
say let's take lung cancer again so you
have 50 mutations
in patient a 50 different mutations in
cancer in in patient b but their lung
cancers look exactly the same under the
microscope
how does that happen like if you have a
hundred mutations your cell should look
completely different than this other guy
cell yet they look precisely the same
under the microscope it's because
it was the original sort of cell you're
simply stripping stuff away you're not
adding mutations on you're actually
stripping those away and what's
fascinating is that the genetic so all
this genetic stuff that we've done
when you look at the mutations of cancer
they're all
concentrated in this area
which is the the the difference between
unicellular and multicellular organisms
so they did these studies where they
take all the genes and they say let's
rank them by evolutionary age
so these are the ancient genes these are
the
recent genes and they put them on and
then they say where are the cancer
mutations and they're all clustered
right around the point between
unicellular and multicellular organisms
i'm like that is so interesting
so then of course the reason it's
important is because now you have if
this is an evolutionary problem if these
are actually unicellular organisms well
now we actually have ways to fight these
unicellular organs and that's our immune
system and that's led to this sort of
explosion and interest in immunotherapy
because we're not trying to kill cells
with immunotherapy we're not trying to
um
we're not trying to fix genetic
mutations what we're trying to do is
treat these
cancers like a foreign species like an
invasive foreign species
and be able to identify them and also
bolster our own immune system to attack
them
but now you're getting a totally
different paradigm because you're the
concept of what this disease is
it's an evolutionary disease
which requires immune system to fight it
because that's our own defenses
that's fascinating like that's a totally
different
paradigm and such an interesting uh
way to look at it and it's going to lead
to all these new treatments so in the
book i talk about immunotherapy we talk
about the obscopal effect which is how
radiation plus immunotherapy may
actually help unearth these things we
talk about adaptive therapy where
perhaps you don't have to give maximally
tolerated doses of chemotherapy because
you may not need it it may be more
effective to use smaller doses
all stems from the understanding of the
evolutionary paradigm of cancer as
opposed to the genetic paradigm of
cancer where you would never be able to
understand why these treatments that are
coming up now
are going to be effective
man this this is really feels and you
talk about sort of the hope this brings
in the book and it really does feel
hopeful you know because if you've
pursued something to a dead end it's
like until you have another path to go
down it's a pretty ugly place to be
one of the things that you outline in
the book that i thought was really
enlightening is what it is exactly the
you talk about the seed in the soil so
what is it about our modern life that
creates this soil that stresses the cell
just enough
that it is like sort of in scramble mode
of whoa i have to i'm constantly looking
for this new mutation or stack of
mutations that's going to allow me
some path through this cigarette smoke
this dietary problem this whatever
if you can walk people through what
we've sort of done to the soil
and please if you can't mention
the when you talked about the bomb in
hiroshima and nagasaki how they were
expecting a certain cancer rate but they
didn't get it and why that is
so interesting yeah i thought i thought
so too
thanks
this concept is that
you need both genetics as well as the
environment like both are important i'm
not saying one is more important but you
have to have a seed which is obviously
all the genetic material that you need
to become a plant for example
but you have to plant it in the right
soil so you take a seed you put it in
the desert it doesn't grow put a seed
put it in proper soil and give it water
it grows so cancer
the seed is there in every single one of
our cells
in not just us but every animal
practically that we know
has that seed of cancer because cancer
of course is our sort of genetic uh
ancestor that was the unicellular
organism from way way way back so that's
so that's that
yeah exactly the selfish sort of
unicellular organism but that seed of
cancer is there luckily
if we prevent it from growing by using
the proper soil we can actually prevent
it and you look at these things that
cause
you know cause cancer they're called
carcinogens
it turns out our diet is one of the
biggest ones so other than tobacco smoke
diet is sort of way up there and when
you look at carcinogens there's a
specific sort of uh thing that have to
be chronic and they have to be sort of
sublethally damaging which is the point
about hiroshima that is radiation we
know causes cancer for sure so when they
dropped the atomic bomb they thought man
we're going to get a lot of cancers
coming down the pipes but it was a
single large dose of radiation not a
chronic low dose of radiation which does
cause a lot of cancer so they did these
atomic they did these studies where they
followed people for for years and years
and there was a little bit of extra
cancer but like on
on average way less so when they
estimate how many months of you know
months or years of life lost it was like
two months something like that so these
people were living like 82 years and
they estimate that that that atomic
radiation maybe cost them like two
months of life
way less because we are thinking that
these people are going to get
you know cancers at age 20 sort of thing
and that didn't happen because it wasn't
this chronic thing and that the reason
it has to be chronic is that cancer is
an evolutionary process
if you do not have chronic selection
pressure you don't get this change if
you just have to change the mutations
and you need they're going to be random
and they need to occur over time
they have to occur continuously because
that's the way that selection pressure
works in an evolution in a population of
cells
that is if you if you select for certain
and do it once that's not going to be
that effective uh if you keep selecting
for those cells like you only take the
the the cells that are sort of
survivalists which are the the sort of
more primitive cells then you over time
you're going to select the population
that's going to have more of those sort
of survivalist cells if you have a
single event
there's no further selection pressure
that is uh if you look at
you know if you look at
evolution of species it's the same thing
you can't simply have one event it has
to be a continuous selection pressure
that produces that change and that's why
it has to be a chronic thing so tobacco
smoking for example you look at viruses
so if you have a single terrible virus
like hepatitis a which is causes
fulminant hepatic failure it kills you
but it doesn't give you cancer as
opposed to hepatitis b which is a
chronic
virus
it doesn't kill you but it certainly
does give you cancer h pylori in the
stomach for example a very low-grade
chronic infection is what gives you
cancer not a single sort of fulminant
episode of inflammation that doesn't
give you cancer so
you know all of these these sort of
things uv light and so on they're all
chronic
damage and that's part of that soil and
diet plays a huge role and the promise
of course is that if you look at
traditional populations like when they
looked at uh populations that lived very
simply so very low sugar very natural
foods they weren't eating all the time
very little obesity so people in africa
that they had studied dennis burkett in
the 50s and 60s and then in the inui
people which live in the far north for
example
they used
these expeditions up to the arctic
circle to find why these these native
peoples these inui
were immune to cancer
then of course they became civilized we
gave them
you know sugar we gave them white flour
because they didn't go bad
then they got all the same cancers turns
out they weren't immune at all
it was their environment it was the soil
that was so important but the promise is
that if you can fix that soil that means
you could actually
overcome
the genetics
not in all cases but in many cases
especially of these obesity associated
cancers the breast cancer colorectal and
so on and that's the sort of really
important thing in the sort of take-home
message for a lot of people is that the
diet actually plays a massive role and
by understanding it perhaps you can
reduce your risk of cancer and that's
where fasting as a way to control your
weight as a way to control type 2
diabetes which is a risk factor as
those are going to lower the risk factor
for
obesity which is a big risk factor for
those obesity associated cancers but
it's your lifestyle that's going to play
a big role not necessarily some drug
that's or anything like that so it's all
in your own hands it's amazing
that that is truly amazing now as one
sort of final point on this
is
is the chronic stressor
is that simply being tipped into growth
mode or is it inflammation coupled with
the fact that we're tipped into growth
mode like what is it specifically about
our diet that's causing this perfect
soil for mutations over time
that leads to cancer
i think they're i think both are are
correct so if you have a chronic
hyperinsulinemia insulin is a very
powerful growth factor
inflammation as a cause of chronic
damage in itself will cause
cancer so you look at the disease such
as ulcerative colitis or crohn's colitis
these are called the so-called
inflammatory bowel diseases
there's this chronic inflammation in the
bowel and what you get is a super high
risk of cancer down down the line so
both inflammation and
hyperinsulinemia and obesity all of them
are risk factors and and this is the
important thing is that
there's a lot of different things that
can contribute to the risk of cancer
it's not just that if one is right then
the other is wrong i mean both are
correct so if you eat
foods that are highly inflammatory and a
lot of people feel that for example
omega-6 seed oils perhaps are in in
these big doses that we take perhaps
those are highly inflammatory that
even if it doesn't cause obesity could
be a factor because we know inflammation
chronic inflammation can certainly do
that so both can be very important
man i really hope people read your book
the cancer code it it was
very insightful if people want to stay
connected with you learn more follow
your extraordinary clinical based uh
thinking where do they go
you can follow me on twitter my handle's
at dr jason fung that's dr.jason fung
also
my website is the thefastingmethod.com
and you can also find me on youtube my
channel is jasonfung and i have a number
of videos on fasting
um and and other things uh so
check me out there and you know i hope
uh you know and then my books of course
the the obesity code the diabetes code
the cancer code
love it awesome jason thank you so much
for joining me today i really really
enjoyed our time together and i really
enjoyed researching you as well i'm so
super grateful and speaking of things
you'll be grateful for if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential